But when most writers and academics discuss native speakers and the ownership of English they tend to refer not to non-standard varieties but to standard British English or standard American English. Paradoxically, these varieties of English do not have genuine native speakers in large numbers, and it has even been maintained that standard Englishes are entirely learned within a scholastic or academic environment.

The so-called native speakers of standard Englishes are those people who have somehow espoused a particular set of conventions that loosely have to do with the way English has been codified and prescribed in dictionaries, grammar books and guides to good speaking and writing. This group of people includes a large number of those who, having espoused the conventions, nevertheless do not consider themselves to be excellent users of those conventions.

For many of these so-called native speakers the English language is a unique entity that exists outside or beyond its users. Rather than considering themselves owners of English, users often think of themselves as guardians of something precious: they wince when they hear or read uses of English that they consider to be sub-standard, and they worry, in their letters to newspapers, that the language is becoming degraded. The degradation may be perceived to come from non-native speakers, but much more prevalent is the notion that it is native users of English themselves who are bringing about the decline. Indeed, a fairly commonly held notion claims that "foreigners", or non-native speakers, can, and do, use English rather better than native speakers.

Turning things round the other way, I have met native speakers teaching English who have been upbraided by their non-native-speaker employers for accepting their students' idiomatic, non-standard usages and not correcting their English according to standard English conventions.

Those who do feel they have rights and privileges, who have a sense of ownership of the English language and who can make pronouncements about what is or is not acceptable, as well as those to whom these attributes are accorded by others, do not necessarily belong to a speech community whose members learned English in infancy. Native speakers of non-standard varieties of English, in other words, the majority of native speakers of English, have never had any real authority over Standard English and have never "owned" it. The actual proprietors may, after all, simply be those who have learned thoroughly how to use a standard English to enjoy the sense of empowerment that comes with it.

So those who make authoritative pronouncements about a standard English are simply those who, irrespective of accidents of birth, have elevated themselves, or been elevated, to positions of authority in academe or publishing or in other public areas. Whether or not their pronouncements will continue to be accepted is another matter.